README.md, before:

# Federated GraphQL API Gateway Reference Implementation

A reference implementation of a federated GraphQL API and IAM delegation to individual data providers.

## Overview

**TLDR**:
- Data are resident on infrastructure maintained by data owners, and data owners have complete control over what data they expose and to whom they expose those data.
- This project shows one way to implement a **Federated Data Mesh**.
- Federated Data Mesh is not the same thing as **Federated Analytics**, specifically:
  - In **Federated Data Mesh**, individual data product owners maintain their own data and control access to those data. However, ultimately, data consumers make API calls against some kind of API Gateway, which composes results from individual providers and returns to the caller.
  - In **Federated Analytics**, some kind of executable code is literally sent to run on providers' infrastructure, and only the results of these computations are sent back to the caller.

![overview diagram](docs/architecture.svg)

In the example above, two health data products are shown: one produced by the Province of Quebec and one from the Province of Ontario.
Each of these entities entirely manages the infrastructure for their data products.
Importantly, data are resident on each entity's infrastructure, and identity and access management (IAM) is handled entirely by each entity.

Each entity registers their API with an API Gateway and identity provider (IDP) aggregator maintained by PHAC.
This registration process ensures that certain API compatibility requirements are met.

The envisioned flow of a request from a data consumer looks as followed (illustrated for Province of Quebec, but the same process is true for any delegated API).

1. Data consumer authenticates against an IDP aggregator, which delegates authentication (Authn) and authorization (Authz) to the necessary provider-specific IAM tenants.
2. Province of Quebec's IAM tenant authenticates the sign on request. Based on Province of Quebec's IAM policies, certain capabilities associated with that user are included in JWT claims returned with the token for the request. For example, the user may belong to a given Azure Active Directory (AAD) security group, which may be attached to a series of role assignments granting a certain level of access for the data product in question.
3. Data consumer makes a request to the GraphQL API gateway containing a GraphQL query requesting a subset of the global data model. The API gateway figures out which individual providers need to be queried for each field of the user's query. In this example, Province of Quebec is one of the data providers that is needed to satisfy the Data Consumer's query.
4. The API gateway forwards the appropriate request to the Province of Quebec's Data Product API server, containing the necessary GraphQL query and the Data Consumer's JWT.
5. The Data Product API internally calls its database(s) to retrieve the data required by the GraphQL query.
6. The data owner implements a differential privacy engine that uses the claims in the JWT attached to the request to determine which fields/instances the Data Consumer has access to. The details of this differential privacy engine are entirely managed by the Province of Quebec.
7. A data payload with the appropriate censoring applied is returned to the API gateway. The API gateway combines the data returned by Province of Quebec with data returned by any other federated data owners, and returns the result to the Data Consumer.

## Federated GraphQL Query Example

### Subgraph Structure

In this illustrative example, there is one logical supergraph comprised of two subgraphs: `prov-qc` and `prov-on`.
Importantly, each subgraph is owned by a separate entity, yet the two subgraphs depend on eachother.
The diagram below illustrates the `prov-qc` and `prov-on` subgraphs, along with their respective dependencies.

![example-supergraph](docs/subgraphs.svg)

### How Fields are Resolved Across Subgraphs

Since `prov-qc` and `prov-on` are federated, each service maintains a data model of its subgraph; this data model is defined in each service's `schema.js` file.
The figures below illustrate each entity's portion of the subgraph from the perspective of their individual data models.

![prov-qc data model](docs/prov-qc-data-model.svg)
![prov-on data model](docs/prov-on-data-model.svg)

Importantly, `prov-qc` needs to be aware of a `Reivew` entity, but needs only to keep track of which `Review` IDs are associated with given `Author`s and `Game`s.
Similarly, `prov-on` needs to be aware of the `Game` and `Author` entities, but needs only to keep track of which `Game` and `Author` IDs are associated with each `Review`.

Since `prov-qc` holds data for entities that are referenced in other subgraphs (`Game` and `Author`), it needs to have the ability to resolve references to `Game` and `Author` entities from other subgraphs.
Similarly, `prov-on` holds data for `Review` entities that are referenced in other subgraphs, and needs to be able to resolve `Review` references from those subgraphs.
This reference resolution capability is implemented with the `__resolveReference` function.
The `resolveReference` node on the diagram is outlined in green to indicate that it is implemented separately in the `resolvers.js` module rather than the `schema.js` module where the subgraphs are defined.






### Authz (JWTs)

Suppose a client (data requestor) wants to submit a GraphQL query against the API gateway, and their query spans both subgraphs.
Since the combined object requested in the GraphQL query will consist of elements from both federated APIs, the client needs to have the appropriate JWT claims for each API.
For this simple example, suppose that the client provides a single JWT with claim scopes for each of the `prov-qc` and `prov-on` APIs.
The important concept here is that the client's identity and permissions need to be checked agianst each federated API behind the gateway.

**Note**: in this illustrative examples, `"changeme"` is used as the secret key for the HMAC algorithm. In a real application, this should be treated as a sensitive value and managed appropriately. 

**Decoded JWT**

```javascript
// Header
{
  "alg": "HS256",
  "typ": "JWT"
}
// Payload (claims)
{
  "prov-qc": {
    "role": "Manager"
  },
  "prov-on": {
    "reviews": [
      "read",
      "write"
    ]
  },
  "name": "Jane Doe",
  "iat": 1516239022
}
// Verify Signature
HMACSHA256(
  base64UrlEncode(header) + "." +
  base64UrlEncode(payload),
  "changeme"
)
```

**Base 64 Encoded JWT**

```
eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiIsInR5cCI6IkpXVCJ9.eyJwcm92LXFjIjp7InJvbGUiOiJNYW5hZ2VyIn0sInByb3Ytb24iOnsicmV2aWV3cyI6WyJyZWFkIiwid3JpdGUiXX0sIm5hbWUiOiJKYW5lIERvZSIsImlhdCI6MTUxNjIzOTAyMn0.sxCKeHno1vH6luq17IzuvMNMWL6_N7sV3HMTM6xpup8
```

### Authz (GraphQL Shield)

### Attribution
- GraphQL icon borrowed from [graphql.org](https://graphql.org/brand/).
- Ory icon borrowed from thier [github organization](https://github.com/ory).

Commit message:

docs(README.md): include point of care collection example

README.md, after:

# Federated GraphQL API Gateway Reference Implementation

A reference implementation of a federated GraphQL API and IAM delegation to individual data providers.

## Overview

**TLDR**:
- Data are resident on infrastructure maintained by data owners, and data owners have complete control over what data they expose and to whom they expose those data.
- This project shows one way to implement a **Federated Data Mesh**.
- Federated Data Mesh is not the same thing as **Federated Analytics**, specifically:
  - In **Federated Data Mesh**, individual data product owners maintain their own data and control access to those data. However, ultimately, data consumers make API calls against some kind of API Gateway, which composes results from individual providers and returns to the caller.
  - In **Federated Analytics**, some kind of executable code is literally sent to run on providers' infrastructure, and only the results of these computations are sent back to the caller.

![overview diagram](docs/architecture.svg)

In the example above, two health data products are shown: one produced by the Province of Quebec and one from the Province of Ontario.
Each of these entities entirely manages the infrastructure for their data products.
Importantly, data are resident on each entity's infrastructure, and identity and access management (IAM) is handled entirely by each entity.

Each entity registers their API with an API Gateway and identity provider (IDP) aggregator maintained by PHAC.
This registration process ensures that certain API compatibility requirements are met.

The envisioned flow of a request from a data consumer looks as followed (illustrated for Province of Quebec, but the same process is true for any delegated API).

1. Data consumer authenticates against an IDP aggregator, which delegates authentication (Authn) and authorization (Authz) to the necessary provider-specific IAM tenants.
2. Province of Quebec's IAM tenant authenticates the sign on request. Based on Province of Quebec's IAM policies, certain capabilities associated with that user are included in JWT claims returned with the token for the request. For example, the user may belong to a given Azure Active Directory (AAD) security group, which may be attached to a series of role assignments granting a certain level of access for the data product in question.
3. Data consumer makes a request to the GraphQL API gateway containing a GraphQL query requesting a subset of the global data model. The API gateway figures out which individual providers need to be queried for each field of the user's query. In this example, Province of Quebec is one of the data providers that is needed to satisfy the Data Consumer's query.
4. The API gateway forwards the appropriate request to the Province of Quebec's Data Product API server, containing the necessary GraphQL query and the Data Consumer's JWT.
5. The Data Product API internally calls its database(s) to retrieve the data required by the GraphQL query.
6. The data owner implements a differential privacy engine that uses the claims in the JWT attached to the request to determine which fields/instances the Data Consumer has access to. The details of this differential privacy engine are entirely managed by the Province of Quebec.
7. A data payload with the appropriate censoring applied is returned to the API gateway. The API gateway combines the data returned by Province of Quebec with data returned by any other federated data owners, and returns the result to the Data Consumer.

# Extension to Point of Care Data Collection

An extension of this architecture is to consider what it would look like for a data collection site to use a Federated GraphQL gateway to write data to the appropriate province/territory's GraphQL API.
With this setup, data could be validated on the client-side at the time of data collection, and routed directly to the appropriate Province/Territory's GraphQL API via the Federated GraphQL API Gateway.


![point-of-care architecture example](docs/pos-write-to-gateway.svg)


## Federated GraphQL Query Example

### Running the Example

> TODO

### Subgraph Structure

In this illustrative example, there is one logical supergraph comprised of two subgraphs: `prov-qc` and `prov-on`.
Importantly, each subgraph is owned by a separate entity, yet the two subgraphs depend on eachother.
The diagram below illustrates the `prov-qc` and `prov-on` subgraphs, along with their respective dependencies.

![example-supergraph](docs/subgraphs.svg)

### How Fields are Resolved Across Subgraphs

Since `prov-qc` and `prov-on` are federated, each service maintains a data model of its subgraph; this data model is defined in each service's `schema.js` file.
The figures below illustrate each entity's portion of the subgraph from the perspective of their individual data models.

![prov-qc data model](docs/prov-qc-data-model.svg)
![prov-on data model](docs/prov-on-data-model.svg)

Importantly, `prov-qc` needs to be aware of a `Reivew` entity, but needs only to keep track of which `Review` IDs are associated with given `Author`s and `Game`s.
Similarly, `prov-on` needs to be aware of the `Game` and `Author` entities, but needs only to keep track of which `Game` and `Author` IDs are associated with each `Review`.

Since `prov-qc` holds data for entities that are referenced in other subgraphs (`Game` and `Author`), it needs to have the ability to resolve references to `Game` and `Author` entities from other subgraphs.
Similarly, `prov-on` holds data for `Review` entities that are referenced in other subgraphs, and needs to be able to resolve `Review` references from those subgraphs.
This reference resolution capability is implemented with the `__resolveReference` function.
The `resolveReference` node on the diagram is outlined in green to indicate that it is implemented separately in the `resolvers.js` module rather than the `schema.js` module where the subgraphs are defined.






### Authz (JWTs)

Suppose a client (data requestor) wants to submit a GraphQL query against the API gateway, and their query spans both subgraphs.
Since the combined object requested in the GraphQL query will consist of elements from both federated APIs, the client needs to have the appropriate JWT claims for each API.
For this simple example, suppose that the client provides a single JWT with claim scopes for each of the `prov-qc` and `prov-on` APIs.
The important concept here is that the client's identity and permissions need to be checked agianst each federated API behind the gateway.

**Note**: in this illustrative examples, `"changeme"` is used as the secret key for the HMAC algorithm. In a real application, this should be treated as a sensitive value and managed appropriately. 

**Decoded JWT**

```javascript
// Header
{
  "alg": "HS256",
  "typ": "JWT"
}
// Payload (claims)
{
  "prov-qc": {
    "role": "Manager"
  },
  "prov-on": {
    "reviews": [
      "read",
      "write"
    ]
  },
  "name": "Jane Doe",
  "iat": 1516239022
}
// Verify Signature
HMACSHA256(
  base64UrlEncode(header) + "." +
  base64UrlEncode(payload),
  "changeme"
)
```

**Base 64 Encoded JWT**

```
eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiIsInR5cCI6IkpXVCJ9.eyJwcm92LXFjIjp7InJvbGUiOiJNYW5hZ2VyIn0sInByb3Ytb24iOnsicmV2aWV3cyI6WyJyZWFkIiwid3JpdGUiXX0sIm5hbWUiOiJKYW5lIERvZSIsImlhdCI6MTUxNjIzOTAyMn0.sxCKeHno1vH6luq17IzuvMNMWL6_N7sV3HMTM6xpup8
```

### Authz (GraphQL Shield)

### Attribution
- GraphQL icon borrowed from [graphql.org](https://graphql.org/brand/).
- Ory icon borrowed from thier [github organization](https://github.com/ory).
